[THEME MUSIC]
>>GEORGE NOORY: Well,
welcome to "Beyond Belief."
We're going to do this
program with some hesitation,
and I'll tell you
why in just a moment.
Robert Murch is the world's
foremost collector, historian,
and expert on Ouija
and talking boards.
He serves as the chairman of
the board for the Talking Board
Historical Society, which
he founded some time ago.
Robert, welcome to the program.
>>ROBERT MURCH: Thank you
so much for having me,
and I appreciate you having
me even with hesitation.
Hopefully we'll--
>>NOORY: Hesitation because
I hate Ouija boards.
>>MURCH: I know.
>>NOORY: But you like them.
>>MURCH: I love them.
>>NOORY: You're
not afraid of them.
>>MURCH: I'm not afraid of them
even being this close to one.
>>NOORY: My gosh.
Well, Murch, you
collect Ouija boards.
>>MURCH: I do, or
they collect me.
I don't know why.
>>NOORY: How old is the
oldest board you have?
>>MURCH: Ouija was named
and first manufactured
in Baltimore, Maryland, in 1890.
But talking boards,
including the board
that would become
Ouija, predate that.
So 1886, there's this
explosion of talking boards.
There's an article in the early
Associated Press takes that
article, describes how
to make a talking board,
what it's used for--
talking to the dead--
and tells everyone how to do it.
And it goes everywhere
all over the world.
And so talking boards
start to pick up steam,
but they were close right out
of the spiritualist movement.
So right from 1848,
they were already
using devices to help people
who maybe didn't have the gift.
>>NOORY: Was it serious, or
was it a game at the time?
>>MURCH: In the
beginning, it was serious.
It was all about death.
And for me as a
historian, what I always--
how I look through the
lens of the Ouija board
is every decade how
are people seeing
and what was their
relationship with death
because today we are
so far away from death.
We look better.
We go to the gym.
We have better treatments.
We dye our hair.
We have plastic surgery.
All of these things keep
us farther away from death.
When talking boards or any
spirit communication devices
came out in the 1800s, it was
because we were coming out
of massive death.
The Civil War,
everyone lost someone.
>>NOORY: Yep.
>>MURCH: And so reaching
out to talk to the dead
was an obvious thing
to do as opposed
to nefarious or evil things.
>>NOORY: And they were into
those things, seances and stuff
like that in a big way.
>>MURCH: We didn't
have the internet,
and we didn't have Netflix.
And so late at night,
the entire family
would gather around
one of these boards
that they probably
made themselves.
Again until 1890, these were
just homemade things, things
that you would
just make yourself.
And the very first boxes of the
official Ouija board from 1890
would show an entire family
sitting around that table
with a little kid holding a
teddy bear, everyone playing.
So this game was
meant for everyone,
and that's because the
relationship with death
was closer, more intimate
than it is today.
>>NOORY: It wasn't as scary
as it comes across these days.
How did you get
involved with it?
>>MURCH: Well, I
don't look like it,
but I was raised Orthodox Jew.
When you're raised in
an orthodox religion,
it's all real.
So your superstitions, your--
and God, ghosts,
demons, all of that's
baked into your very foundation.
So it's not as scary, especially
in the Jewish religion,
because you can ask
rabbis and talk to them.
My grandmother was fantastic,
and she loved creature
double feature.
She loved all of these things
that were not your typical way.
She snuck me into--
>>NOORY: For a granny.
>>MURCH: Yeah, for a
grandmother that was orthodox.
And my mother would say he can't
see or do this, this, or this.
And as she left the
house, my grandmother
would say we're doing
this, this, and this.
Don't tell your mother.
And so she snuck me in 1986 to
a movie called "Witchboard."
>>NOORY: "Witchboard"?
>>MURCH: And when I
say she snuck me in,
I mean she genuinely
snuck me in.
She distracted
the person while--
>>NOORY: She had you
covered up or something?
>>MURCH: Well, I snuck in.
And it's funny because
I was 13 years old
and we probably just
could've paid the person.
But she snuck me in, and I was--
>>NOORY: Were you
not allowed to go in?
>>MURCH: It was rated R,
and I was just too young.
>>NOORY: You weren't
allowed to go in.
>>MURCH: Yeah, I wasn't
allowed, but my grandmother
didn't, I guess, care
about those rules.
And so I went in,
and we watched.
And it was fascinating
to me that something
that is made out of wood
or paper and cardboard
would terrify someone.
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
>>MURCH: And that is
what fascinated me.
And then fast
forward to 1992 when
I first started collecting,
I went to the University
of New Hampshire.
Great school.
I was in a quad, so I
had three roommates.
And those roommates decided--
[CLEARING THROAT]
excuse me-- they
wanted to go into a fraternity.
And I knew that if I
went to a fraternity,
it wouldn't end well for me.
Probably college wasn't
going to go anywhere.
>>NOORY: It wasn't
your cup of tea.
>>MURCH: It was
great to have friends
to go to fraternity parties but
also to have a place to study.
>>NOORY: Exactly.
>>MURCH: In their rushing
for the fraternity, they--
it was on a list
of a treasure hunt
that they needed to
find Ouija boards.
Just an old Ouija board.
Coming from Boston where I lived
most of my life, New Englander,
every weekend, you
would go to yard sales
and you go to flea
markets and antiquing.
I knew I'd seen
them, very cheap.
So I picked a bunch up,
and when I was done,
they gave them all back
to me and there were 10.
And they were all different.
And I thought to myself isn't
there only one Ouija board?
>>NOORY: Right.
>>MURCH: So hopefully
many of your viewers
will remember this.
I had to actually go to a
physical place, a library,
which was basically
Wikipedia only in a place.
And every encyclopedia
I looked into
said the Ouija board came
from a different place.
And I thought how can everyone
I talk to know what it is.
Most people have played
it or have a story right,
but we don't know
where it comes from.
And that moment in 1992 in
a library in the University
of New Hampshire set me off
into a worldwide journey
of searching for who are the
people behind the Ouija board.
What were they thinking?
Why did they create this?
>>NOORY: What moves
the planchette?
>>MURCH: The whole thing.
>>NOORY: All that stuff.
I wanted to know
everything about it,
and I'm still learning today.
>>NOORY: I'll tell
you my story of why I
turned against the Ouija board.
In the beginning, I thought it
was, hey, a fun little game,
couple people put their
fingertips on a planchette.
It moves around.
They're probably
moving it I would say,
and you do your thing.
Well, one day I brought it into
my radio studio in St. Louis.
I was doing the
Nighthawk Radio Show,
and I had a Ouija
board in the studio.
My producer was in his little
booth, and I'm doing my show.
All of a sudden,
Murch, the board--
the audio board for the radio
council starts going haywire.
It never went haywire.
I wanted to go to a commercial,
which was on a computer, just
so I could regroup myself.
It wouldn't play.
I'm dying.
So I go to the phones to
answer callers who are calling
going get rid of that thing.
I couldn't get them on the air.
Nothing would work.
So I gave--
Howard was my
producer at the time,
and I gave him the Ouija board.
And I said Howard-- on the air--
get rid of this thing,
and he said, OK.
So he takes it out, and
the first thing he does
is he gives it to one of
our news guys named Darryl.
Gives it to him as a gift.
He said take this.
George doesn't want it.
Oh, OK, yeah, I'll take it.
It's in a box.
It's got all this.
Sure.
Darryl gets fired the next day.
We don't see him after that.
He's gone.
I run into him two months later
at about a little nightclub.
Said, Darryl, how you doing?
Rotten.
What's wrong?
He said you want to know.
I said, yeah, what's wrong.
He said ever since Howard
gave me that Ouija board,
my life has gone downhill.
I lost my job as you
well know, but I also
lost my relationship.
My parents, one of
them got very sick.
Everything negative
has happened to me.
I finally got rid of it.
I burned it, and things are
getting a little better for me.
I heard that story and
said you know what.
There's something
evil about this thing.
Now you don't agree with me.
Karen Dahlman, who's
into Ouija boards,
she won't agree with me.
But there's something
about this thing.
>>MURCH: You know there is.
And what's unique about it is--
so we talked about
talking boards originally
in the 1800s were meant
to talk to the dead.
That's what they
were supposed to do.
And Ouija itself
that Hasbro owns
the trademark and the
rights to it today
and they continue to make it.
>>NOORY: Used to
be Parker Brothers.
>>MURCH: They bought
Parker Brothers in 1991.
And Parker Brothers
bought it in 1966
from the William Fuld family who
made it from under their name
1901 to 1966.
>>NOORY: They manufacture them?
>>MURCH: Yep.
>>NOORY: Yeah.
>>MURCH: And Ouija itself, the
originators of the Ouija board,
who create this board, they come
up with a different solution.
They see other talking boards
that people are making,
and they decide those
people are telling
their customers
or the people who
are making them why it works.
Well, that means you have to
believe to want to use it.
>>NOORY: Right.
>>MURCH: They wanted to
make a million dollars.
So the Ouija board is actually
capitalism and spiritualism
meeting head on.
And what happens is
they decide let's put it
in every room and every
parlor in America instead
of just the spiritualists
because that's
a small group of people.
We wanted to put it everywhere.
>>NOORY: We and
everyone to have this.
>>MURCH: And so they
immediately put on their boxes
we don't claim to know how
or why the Ouija board works,
but with your patience, it
will exceed your greatest
expectations.
So by allowing it to be
what you want it to be,
a fortune teller,
parting the veil
and talking to the dead,
some psychic device, whatever
you decide, whether you
call it Ouija tell me this
or whether you just say,
Granny, are you there,
you're in charge.
What's really unique
is in all the--
in the years of me investigating
this, I lived close in Boston
to Ed and Lorraine Warren
being in Connecticut.
>>NOORY: Oh, absolutely.
They were the best.
>>MURCH: And they
would call me trying
to impress upon me how
dangerous I was living with all
these Ouija boards around me.
And--
>>NOORY: Take heed.
>>MURCH: Yes, I did.
I listened.
But it didn't stop
me, but I did--
I kept them in the basement,
so I guess that was good.
All over the walls.
But the-- years later, I
had a wonderful conversation
with Lorraine and it was
about a long, long interview.
And we came to-- and
something I didn't
think we'd agree on which was
the behind the Ouija board.
And she said I think
all of these things
are equally dangerous because
I was asking her, well,
what about the tarot.
>>NOORY: I would agree with her.
>>MURCH: And she said
because the act of conjuring
is what's happening--
the board doesn't have
any power you don't give to it.
You're calling something
you don't know.
>>NOORY: You're
pulling something in.
>>MURCH: And you don't know,
and you don't know what to do.
And so-- and I said if
there's danger, I agree.
That's what you're-- it's
like getting on the train
and talking to the
first person you meet.
You might be talking
to a serial killer.
>>NOORY: You might be.
>>MURCH: Or you might be
talking to the nicest person
in the world, the
next Mother Teresa.
Who knows?
>>NOORY: Doubtful.
>>MURCH: In this world today--
but what's neat
is the Ouija board
has power that other spirit
communication devices that we
use today don't have like a
K2 meter or an EVP recorder,
and I'll just give
you an example
of why I think that is--
and why it's a little dangerous.
The Ouija board does nothing.
It's the telephone we happen to
be using to talk to whatever,
and there's nothing special or
magic about paper and cardboard
or wood and plastic.
There just isn't.
>>NOORY: It's the individual.
>>MURCH: Right.
Because we believe--
9/10 of our reality
is our beliefs.
We carry this with us.
And if we believe--
like you were just telling
that story about your friend
that he believed by
getting it out of the house
his luck would change.
He has given power over
himself to the Ouija board
by saying it's the Ouija board.
If you and I were using the
Ouija board and something bad
happened, you would want
it gone like you mentioned.
>>NOORY: Like I do now.
>>MURCH: Right, exactly.
Already you want
edging backwards.
>>NOORY: It's looking at me.
>>MURCH: And-- but if
we were on the phone
and we got into a
fight, an argument,
called each other names and said
terrible things to each other
and hung it up, you wouldn't
throw out the iPhone
and say I'll never have another
one of these in my house
because it doesn't make sense.
The fight was between us, and
we were doing the bad stuff.
The phone-- the iPhone
was just what we're using,
it's the same thing with a Ouija
board except because we believe
the Ouija board has power, get
the Ouija board out of here.
Make sure you sign off
don't leave the planchette.
There are all these
Ouija-stitions,
these urban legends
that have grown out.
And every time one
of those is born,
the Ouija board gains a little
bit more power over you.
>>NOORY: Murch, paranormal
investigator Jim Harold,
talked to me about how
some of these spirits
come through the Ouija board.
Ouija boards.
I stay away from them.
>>JIM HAROLD: I know.
>>NOORY: I had some
bad episodes with them.
There's something about them.
You've looked at them through
your paranormal podcasts.
>>HAROLD: I'm with you.
Now I know there are people
like Karen Dahlman and Rosemary
Ellen--
>>NOORY: Karen loves them.
>>HAROLD: Rosemary
Ellen Guiley tells me
that they're just a tool.
And I love Rosemary.
She's fantastic as you know
having worked with her.
But the thing is is that to
me it's like an instrument.
It's like a chainsaw.
Now there are people very
skilled with a chainsaw who
can make beautiful carvings.
We see people make
carvings out of chainsaws.
>>NOORY: I wouldn't want
to be next to somebody
with a chainsaw.
>>HAROLD: But you
wouldn't want to put
that chainsaw in my hand.
And that's the way I
feel about Ouija boards.
I think many times that they're
put in the hands of people
are just playing a game, and the
thing is that one of my callers
I thought they had
a great description.
It's like--
spiritually speaking,
it's like wearing your best
clothes, your finest jewelry,
all decked out walking in the
worst possible part of town
at 3:30 AM in the
morning down the street
waiting for something
to spiritually mug you.
>>NOORY: Right.
>>HAROLD: That's what I think
because I think a lot of times
when people have let's say
Aunt Millie contact them,
I think they could very well be
an imposter spirit, something
that's latched on
and said we're going
to have a little bit of fun.
>>NOORY: It could be.
Or they want something.
>>HAROLD: Yeah.
Yeah.
I'm not an expert.
I just asked the
questions, and I've
learned via the people who
I've spoken to over the years
but I believe that
it's very dangerous
to treat it as a game.
And just last week
I had a caller
who said I had a great
experience with a Ouija board.
We had the spirit
and we would talk
and it was a very
nice relationship.
But he's got more
guts than I do.
I'll give you an example.
I have a young lady
who had a Ouija board.
I believe it was one
of the Carolinas.
And she was there with a friend.
Teenagers, they had
candles lit and so forth,
and they had more of
those old lava lamps
if you remember those.
>>NOORY: I've seen those.
>>HAROLD: Yes.
Yeah, exactly.
So anyway they said,
well, if you're real,
you'll show us the sign.
So they looked over
at the lava lamp,
and the gloopy stuff
started to formulate
and formulate and formulate, and
it looked like a face, a face.
What kind of face would that be?
Then she said--
>>NOORY: In the lava lamp?
>>HAROLD: In the lava lamp.
It formed into the face
of a snarling devil face.
It snarled at them.
Then they shut the
board, and the gloop
went back those little
gloopy like normal.
Now anything that can
do that, George, I'm
going to stay away from.
>>NOORY: So Jim is
basically saying,
Murch, what you are that it's
not necessarily the board.
It's the person
touching the board.
>>MURCH: It's the intention.
It's what you bring with it.
For instance, we
did a Ouija Con.
We celebrated the
125th anniversary
of the naming of Ouija.
>>NOORY: Ahh, I
bet that was fun.
>>MURCH: It was great.
It was in Baltimore.
It was really a
unique experience
because people came from
all over in the city.
The mayor was involved.
She issued a proclamation.
We tend to do these things with
the Talking Board Historical
Society, and we put in a
plaque in the building that
still stands that you can go
visit where the Ouija board got
its name.
And we had these people
come up to us, these girls,
and they were screaming one
night during the convention.
>>NOORY: Like the
Beatles were here.
>>MURCH: Exactly.
And they were saying we've used
the Ouija board and something
terrible happened.
And it's three of them.
They couldn't calm down,
and we were like calm down.
Tell me what happened.
So we're using the Ouija board,
and it told us how and when
we were going to die.
And they all start
screaming again.
And I said, OK, OK, calm down.
That's very specific.
What were you asking the Ouija
board when it told you that?
And they said, well, we
asked how and when we
were going to die
to which a lot of us
started snickering a little bit.
And the beware there is
don't ask the Ouija board
things you don't want to hear.
It's like if you
believe this works,
ask for the lottery numbers.
I want to be a millionaire.
I wouldn't ask how I was
going to die because then I
would be worried about, oh,
if the Ouija board told me
I was going to die in a red
car, even if I think it's crap
and it's not true, somehow
in the back of my head--
>>NOORY: You're
gonna think about it.
>>MURCH: Exactly.
Why plant a seed that
I don't need to do so--
>>NOORY: And you have a friend
pick you up in a red car.
You're gonna go I don't know
if I'm going to go into this.
>>MURCH: If after
this interview there's
a red car waiting for
me, I'm not getting in.
>>NOORY: No.
I've got you a red
limo waiting for you.
>>MURCH: Perfect.
>>NOORY: You talked about
Karen Dahlman, Ms. Ouija Board.
>>MURCH: Yes.
>>NOORY: Jim Harold talked
about Karen Dahlman as well.
Let's look at Karen Dahlman.
>>MURCH: Great.
>>NOORY: How old
is the Ouija board?
How did it first start?
Who developed it?
>>KAREN DAHLMAN: Well, those
are some good questions
because the Ouija board
as we know it, the Ouija--
it's actually pronounced
Ouija, not weegee--
is from 1891.
In 1890, they filed
a patent on it,
and 1891 is when the patent was
granted by the United States
Patent Office.
And it started being made.
Now there were spirit boards
and maybe other kinds of devices
they use that -- alphabet cards
they used as one or a board
they had the letters
on or numbers.
And people would point to it
or use other kinds of devices,
and that's about mid-1800s
when the spiritualist movement
came about the United States.
People were wanting a way to
communicate with their loved
ones that were beyond.
So when this board
came out, this item,
which is very unique because
they took a planchette, which
is this item right
here, which they usually
used with their hand
on it and a pencil
was an aperture for a pencil
and had to castor wheels
and would roll around
and they would write.
They'd write these phenomenal
messages from the beyond.
And what happened was they took
this, retrofitted if you will,
took off the pencil and it
ended up with three legs--
they could be wooden, or
they could be casters--
and they put it-- they
call it the little table--
and they put it
on top of a board.
And this here is the
1902 board, circa 1902--
>>NOORY: God, this is old.
I'm not sure I want to hold it.
>>DAHLMAN: You touched it.
>>NOORY: I don't
want to hold it.
Bad luck.
>>DAHLMAN: No, goodness, it's
really good luck actually.
So this would go on
top of it like this,
and it would roll around.
So they got rid of the
pencil, the writing,
which was awfully--
most of the time,
it became really
illegible and
scribbly where this
became a more concise, exact
way, quick way, of being
in contact with the beyond.
>>NOORY: She loves those things.
>>MURCH: It's great.
I love seeing Karen.
She's a wonderful
person, and, yeah,
that's why her and
I get along so well.
And she's a member of the
Talking Board Historical
Society, a nonprofit.
>>NOORY: Which we'll
talk about in the second.
Have you ever had a bad
Ouija board experience?
>>MURCH: The worst
experience I've ever had--
and let's explain what is
a bad experience first.
>>NOORY: Oh, yeah.
>>MURCH: So those girls--
>>NOORY: You tell me.
>>MURCH: Those girls
had a bad experience
because they asked a
question that scared them.
So they were afraid of dying
and how they would die,
and they asked that question.
>>NOORY: And they
got a bad answer.
>>MURCH: And to them that
was a bad experience.
What I get to do working
for TV shows and movies
and consulting in
different shows that
want to show the Ouija
board a certain way
is what's really scary.
It's not super scary to play
the Ouija board unless you
hear a sound or the lights go
out or something really strange
happens--
>>NOORY: Or the radio
studio gets screwed up.
>>MURCH: Or like-- right.
Your whole radio studio
goes on the blink.
That's what scares people.
But most of the time,
it's what happens after.
And this is where we give even
more power to the Ouija board.
Suddenly, our brains are wired
to make sense of the nonsense.
It's like looking up at
the sky and seeing clouds.
There is no face in the clouds
even if we recognize one.
>>NOORY: But we see faces.
>>MURCH: We see it.
And so we're trying to
make sense of nonsense.
So we go home after you play the
Ouija board and maybe something
spooked you.
Suddenly, you're hearing
things you never heard before,
and you're seeing shadows
you've never heard before.
It's possible all of
those things were there,
but using the Ouija board
has now given the chance
to weave a story.
And it doesn't
mean that the Ouija
board can't be used
to part the veil
or talk to your subconscious.
This debate's been going
on since the beginning.
Faraday himself did
experiments to prove
whether doing a table talking
or table turning would work.
People were coming to him
as this modern scientist,
and they were saying, hey,
I'm talking to spirits
by using this table.
And he was creating experiments
way back in the 1880s.
>>NOORY: How does the
board work, Murch?
>>MURCH: Depends on the
person or who you're asking.
>>NOORY: You need
two people at least?
>>MURCH: The makers would
say you need two people
because it was a date game.
So let's look back
in Victorian times.
You're not supposed to be alone
with a woman you're not married
to or not related to.
You're certainly not
supposed to be in the dark,
and you're not supposed
to be touching.
Well, the manufacturer--
manufacturers
of the Ouija board realized
something really quickly.
If you took this board and put
it on the knees of two people,
opposite sex preferred,
and suddenly their knees
are touching, their fingers
are touching, they've got--
this is--
>>NOORY: It's a dating game.
>>MURCH: It's a
date game for a guy.
Every guy is willing to play
the Ouija board because--
and the woman is
looking to make contact.
Spiritualism was more
popular with women than men,
not always, but it
was at the time.
And just look at
like Norman Rockwell
painted a cover in 1920 of
the "Saturday Evening Post"
of a man and a woman
playing the Ouija board.
And if you look at that picture,
she is looking up to the ethers
asking a question.
>>NOORY: He's looking at her.
>>MURCH: He's looking
at her right here.
>>NOORY: Exactly.
Who's moving the planchette?
What's moving the planchette?
>>MURCH: Scientists very early
on would say it was something
called ideomotor response,
and that's the marrying
of the small movements
in your hands and--
>>NOORY: Subconsciously?
>>MURCH: Your subconscious.
Because your hands
were made of muscles
and we don't like to stay
still and they want to move
and because we want
the board to work,
we put our hands on and ask a
question and unbeknownst to us,
scientists believe,
your subconscious,
you are pushing it.
You just don't know it.
And it might be the other
person whose subconscious
is stronger than you.
Spiritualists or people
in the paranormal today
believe you're talking to
something other than yourself.
So it's not your subconscious.
Maybe it's something
that's passed over.
Maybe it's something that's
never been here before.
>>NOORY: Does it
always move, Murch?
>>MURCH: I've always had an
easy time getting it to work.
Other people--
>>NOORY: You have?
Quickly?
>>MURCH: Yeah, pretty quickly.
I think it's doing it a lot.
It's like anything else.
And what I tell
people when they're
using it is if you've
never used it before,
do it with four
people to begin with.
>>NOORY: Four little fingers.
>>MURCH: It works better
when more people are on it.
And then as you
get better at it,
you can do less and less people.
And ask questions that
you want answered.
>>NOORY: It's got felt
on the bottom right?
>>MURCH: Exactly, to
make it easy and--
there's a sound to it.
I think we all heard a board.
It's like [IMITATING STATIC].
It's-- when you
use a Ouija board,
something very magical happens.
We focus.
In this world of tap,
swipe, and news--
24 news going on, you sit
down at the Ouija board,
and everyone goes quiet.
>>NOORY: Can you fake it if
you're doing it with somebody?
>>MURCH: I am sure I have played
with people who have purposely
pushed it, so I guess that
would be considered faking it.
>>NOORY: Can you feel that?
>>MURCH: It's hard to tell.
If they're good, if they-- or
if they're just having fun,
then it's obvious.
But I have-- if they don't
know they're doing it,
it's hard to know because the
planchette how it's based,
if everyone's hands
are spaced out evenly
and it's not turning away
from them or towards them,
but I've never had that.
I've never seen
someone purposely do it
to-- unless it was a real joke.
>>NOORY: Mitch
Horowitz, noted author,
talks about people's
fascination with Ouija boards.
Well, our agents obviously
were into all kinds
of metaphysical things.
>>MITCH HOROWITZ: Oh, for sure.
>>NOORY: Weren't they?
>>HOROWITZ: Yeah.
>>NOORY: What got them so
turned on by this stuff?
>>HOROWITZ: They believed that
every aspect of life was sacred
and that everything
that was going on
was part of a continuum.
So if you could freeze
in time a certain moment,
maybe you're using
a divinitory method
like the I Ching or tarot cards
or something else or the stars.
If you could freeze in
time a certain moment,
they believe that you
might be able to discern
everything else that's going
on-- past, present future.
Everything is like a
three-dimensional photograph
of life, and in that sense,
you could use almost any
pictogramatic device to--
for foresight, for prophecy.
>>NOORY: Did they not have any
bad experiences with the Ouija
board or the talking board
as they called it then?
>>HOROWITZ: Sure.
Sure.
Look, I think people had lots
of good and bad experiences,
but we are so hungry to touch
something beyond the physical,
beyond flesh and
bone, that I think
we're very attached to anything
that seems to be a kind of line
of communication to the unseen.
>>NOORY: He's spot on isn't he?
>>MURCH: Spot on.
Mitch Horowitz is a
wonderful human being,
a good friend of mine--
>>NOORY: Good author.
>>MURCH: Has helped
me in my research.
He actually found a
extremely rare article
that I had not
been able to find.
He went to the New York
Library and found it for me.
>>NOORY: Well,
he's good at that.
>>MURCH: He's wonderful.
What he's talking
about is very true,
and here's something
about this belief.
Why do-- why would we use a
Ouija board in the first place?
And what if someone passed
away suddenly that you just
didn't expect it at all.
So it was very sudden.
What if the last thing you said
to someone was terrible and--
>>NOORY: And you
wanted to apologize.
>>MURCH: They got hit by a car.
>>NOORY: Or make
good good for it.
>>MURCH: Guilt. Exactly.
What's going to happen to me?
What's going happen
to my loved ones?
These are all questions
that everyone asks.
And the Ouija board people
go to because nothing else
can answer it for sure.
Just like their
religious beliefs,
they have to take a step.
They have to have faith.
>>NOORY: Well, why do
people, Murch, including me
think that by playing
with the Ouija board
you could open up
the door to evil?
Why do I believe that?
>>MURCH: Because of
unfortunately people like me
who worked in the industry who
portray it that way in movies--
>>NOORY: Why do you--
why do you do that to us?
>>MURCH: It's a great way--
I wasn't the first
person to do it.
It was happening long before me.
But what it is is,
just like Mitch said,
it's that yearning
to have some type
of communication
other than ourselves,
something bigger than
us, something after us,
something around us
that we can't see.
And so using this
board to open a portal
that maybe you can't close--
here's the wonderful
Ouija-stitions of the Ouija
board that scare you.
We're told if we don't say
goodbye, if you don't sign off,
you've left the line open.
If you leave the
planchette on it
you haven't closed it per se.
>>NOORY: You mean
just like it is now?
>>MURCH: Just sitting
there right now.
Well, we haven't used
it and opened it up,
but say we didn't say
goodbye, we've left it open.
>>NOORY: We just walk away.
>>MURCH: That's
what people believe.
People believe you can't get
rid of it, that if you try to--
the only way to get rid
of is to give it away.
If you try to throw it
away, it'll come back.
If you try to burn
it, it won't burn.
You have to bury it.
People have all of these
Ouija-stitions that have grown
up all along this belief--
in this uncomfortableness
with death.
What are we really
afraid of when we're
talking about the Ouija board?
>>NOORY: The unknown.
>>MURCH: The unknown, exactly.
And nothing--
we're lucky that we
have the Ouija board that
has been around since 1890
as we see it today.
Having something be that long,
it's generations of stories.
And you asked Mitch did
people have bad experiences
with the Ouija board.
Right away.
Right away people were
saying that the Ouija
board drove them crazy.
It just wasn't the
overwhelming public.
The overwhelming public
was having fun with it.
The news stories wanted
things like the Ouija board
told me to kill my
mother, so I did.
They didn't want to hear about
how use of the Ouija board
and found a ring that you
lost three months ago.
>>NOORY: Is like a pendulum?
>>MURCH: Similar
belief behind using it.
If you believe
that you're using--
>>NOORY: Because it's
got yes, no up there,
you can ask it questions.
It spells out things.
It's got numbers.
Why does it say goodbye on it.
>>MURCH: Goodbye
was Elijah Bond,
who was one of the originators,
he patents the board.
He doesn't invent it,
but he patents it.
And one of the things
he did was originally
they said good night.
The original talking
boards drawings
we'd have would say
good eve and good night.
It was Victorian times,
and they manners.
So when you started to
talk to the spirits,
you would say good eve.
>>NOORY: Blink out the candles.
>>MURCH: And then when
you're done, good night.
So as pop culture evolved,
good eve and good night
were pushed away to goodbye.
>>NOORY: Now after
this program, you're
probably going to
call Karen Dahlman
and tell her we did a Ouija
board show, and she'll love it.
And she'll go was
George afraid of it?
Did he get rid of it?
>>MURCH: And I'll tell
her, yes, and he sent me
home in a red car.
>>NOORY: That's right.
And said he'll never
put you on again.
>>MURCH: Yeah, that's right.
But over the years,
you and I have
talked about a lot of things--
>>NOORY: But do you admit
evil can come through this?
>>MURCH: If anything can
come through the Ouija board,
then, of course, evil
could come through it.
If it's anything other
than-- even if it's you,
it's potentially evil.
You think about breaking
through your subconscious.
If your mind has made
a wall that you are not
supposed to be touching, if
you start playing with this
and pulling out bricks,
it's not always great.
There is danger in playing
with something you don't know.
>>NOORY: So what
causes that though?
>>MURCH: I think-- what causes
the subconscious to want
to hide things
from you you mean?
Like a traumatic experience.
>>NOORY: Well, I
mean why would evil
come through this when a
couple of kids are playing
and they're not bad kids?
How would that happen?
>>MURCH: What happens
in the movies is
far different than necessarily
what happens at home.
>>NOORY: Are you saying
evil doesn't come through?
>>MURCH: I'm saying
anything's possible.
But in the thousands
of Ouija board cases
that I have taken and cataloged
and gone through and looked at,
there are always other factors.
There's always
something else going on
whether it's something
going on in the family,
whether there is any type of
mental illness in the family.
Now whether that opens them
up to these things more
or whether this is
just their creation--
One of the things
that fascinates
me the most in talking to
Jeff Belanger who I know you
know well.
He's a good friend.
>>NOORY: You know them all.
>>MURCH: He's-- yeah, we've
been around too long I guess.
>>NOORY: They're all into
Ouija boards aren't they.
>>MURCH: It's interesting
because him and I went
to Australia, and we had 75
people playing the Ouija board
all at once.
And what we did was an
interesting experiment.
We were in a jail, and
lots of terrible things
happened in this jail.
>>NOORY: Absolutely, I bet.
>>MURCH: But we told people
nothing happened bad.
This was just a regular jail--
>>NOORY: In Australia?
>>MURCH: In Australia, regular
jail, and we had 75 people.
Looked like the Last
Supper of Ouija boards.
We're all playing
the Ouija board.
Everyone had a great time.
The next time we did it,
we did it telling everyone
there were bad stories.
And everyone was having
a bad time with it.
>>NOORY: Really?
>>MURCH: Knowing that
us planting the seed,
whether again it helped create
a story in their mind out
of nothing or whether it
open them up to something.
Because again remember,
the conversation
is happening between
you and something else,
but you are half of that.
So whatever happens to
the-- with the Ouija board,
you are 50% responsible for.
>>NOORY: Is it true
that Milton Bradley, one
of the developers of the
game, will not publicly
discuss the Ouija board?
>>MURCH: Well, it's-- so a lot
of people think it's Milton
Bradley.
It was Parker Brothers from 1966
to 1991 when Hasbro bought it,
so Hasbro currently is and--
they do answer questions.
They don't answer whether
it's supernatural or not.
To them--
>>NOORY: They don't
touch that do they?
>>MURCH: And again,
Ouija from the beginning
has always been sold as
a game, Ouija proper.
It has been sold in toy stores.
So for people who have a
hard time seeing children--
8 and above it says on the box--
when people see children,
they get really upset.
And I always say
to them children
have been playing with the
Ouija board since 1890.
And let's go back and
look at it for a second.
Let's look through the lens.
In the 1800s-- late 1800s,
if you had 12 children,
six of them could die.
And when they die--
>>NOORY: Or more.
>>MURCH: Right, or more.
>>NOORY: Sad times.
>>MURCH: When they died,
you would dress them up
in their Sunday best,
take a picture-- one
last picture with your family,
and put that on the wall.
>>NOORY: And they're dead.
>>MURCH: That was how
close death was to you.
So you're OK.
Now you can understand
why we talk to the dead.
But here's a funny kind
of thing we've figured out
as we've looked through Ouija
history that may have something
to do with our
relationship with death,
and I find that fascinating.
It was a parlor game
originally, Ouija.
Play it, have fun,
ask questions.
So today like what
happened in the Civil War,
funeral parlors started
popping up because embalming
hadn't existed before this.
Before embalming, you helped
change the ice in your house.
They were in laid
out in your parlor.
They might even be
buried in your backyard
if you had a personal cemetery.
So again death very close.
Now--
>>NOORY: They had wakes.
>>MURCH: As we-- right.
Everything was-- and you would
even go visit the cemetery
and have parties.
You miss them.
To them, the only way
instead of mourning
all the time was to keep
them involved in your life.
The Ouija board was
one of those ways.
And what's really
interesting, though,
is this is how uncomfortable
with death we are today.
And we live-- this is
in an interesting time
that we're also living in.
But what is the room that you
would call the parlor today,
the room everything happens in?
>>NOORY: The living room.
>>MURCH: The living room.
We no longer call it the parlor.
The funeral parlor took
death out of the house,
and we whitewashed it
with the living room.
So that's how uncomfortable we
just naturally are with death.
>>NOORY: I never
thought of that.
>>MURCH: Which is really fun
because again the Ouija board
lets me see it
through this lens how
people feel about death in
every decade, which does shift.
>>NOORY: Karen Dahlman
believes the Ouija
board can be used to discover
who we are on the inside.
>>MURCH: Of course.
>>DAHLMAN: Well,
a Ouijalogist is
somebody who works with a board
and understands how to use it.
>>NOORY: And how do you use it?
>>DAHLMAN: Well I use the
board for only one purpose,
and the purpose is for spiritual
development and growth.
So I make sure that
it's always used
under those kind of auspices.
>>NOORY: When you wrote
"The Spirit of Creativity"
and "The Spirits of
the Ouija," two books,
they're both different.
One deals more with the
inner spirituality of people.
The other one deals
with the Ouija board.
How can somebody
be so different?
>>DAHLMAN: Well, that's
a good way of putting it,
yet they are very similar.
When I was writing the
first book, "The Spirit
of Creativity," I
actually was consulting
with the Ouija board, my
spirit friends, on some topics
to write about.
So this book came
with the topics
that I was working on
with the Ouija board,
meaning personal development,
learning to access creativity,
learning to evolve myself,
become a better person.
So when I wrote "The
Spirits of Ouija--
Four Decades of
Communication," that's
really what was going
on behind the scenes
why I wrote this book.
So really what's been going on
behind the scenes for 40 years
when I wrote this book and
beyond because it talks
about how to go more internally
with yourself, that spirits
actually-- our guides
are here to help
us become more
powerful in our self,
not to go outside our self.
Although the Ouija
board seems like a tool
for outside
ourselves, it's really
a tool to help
you go back within
and to learn great things
about your talents, who
you are, capabilities,
abilities, and those kinds
of things.
>>NOORY: Murch, what
advice would you
give people who want to use
a Ouija board first time?
>>MURCH: First time,
so I would tell them
that they should write down
10 questions they actually
want answers to, not questions
that are going to scare them.
>>NOORY: OK.
>>MURCH: Just practice.
>>NOORY: Legitimate questions?
>>MURCH: Legitimate
questions to get
them going like anything else.
And then also to pick
three other friends
that they trust as much
as you trust friends
that you want to have fun with.
>>NOORY: OK.
>>MURCH: So knowing that there
is-- once we've added a human,
we know that someone might fool
around and push it themselves.
But if-- find
people who genuinely
want to explore this
like anything else
and ask those questions.
And what you'll find is as
you move around the board,
you start to feel how hard
to push and not to push,
that if you push too hard
it stops the planchette.
We don't want that.
And if you take your fingers
off, it doesn't work.
That's in the movies.
I do that in the
movies all the time.
I can promise you I have never
witnessed-- other people have--
but I have never witnessed the
planchette moving on its own.
>>NOORY: Never.
>>MURCH: It's always--
>>NOORY: Now when you say other
people have, how in God's name
could that happen?
>>MURCH: They-- people
believe that it could
be the spirit that's moving it.
Maybe they believe it to them.
One interesting thing I
talked to Jeff a lot about
is are ghosts that we're trying
to talk to through the Ouija
board actually our memories
and projections of that person.
Can our thoughts have
weight in the world?
Can they actually affect things?
>>NOORY: And create things.
>>MURCH: And create things.
So are we creating the ghost
of our grandmother or a demon
or whatever it is we're
afraid of or most want to see?
And I recently--
>>NOORY: It could be.
>>MURCH: Who knows.
These are the people--
>>NOORY: You can't
rule that out.
>>MURCH: Right.
The beauty of these things are
we'll have to pick a belief
or just continue being
skeptical all around
and exploring all of it.
And that's why I love this.
And I recently had an
experience in the paranormal
that definitely, again, makes
you re-evaluate what you think,
and being so close to the Ouija
board in death all the time,
it's interesting.
>>NOORY: You had a
ghost experience.
What happened?
>>MURCH: I did.
So in 2004, there have
been two times in my life
that I have been
very close to dying.
And in 2004, was the first
time I had a noncancerous tumor
taken out of my jaw.
It should have been simple
like all surgeries, simple.
And it turned out I
got a staph infection
and got really, really sick.
And while I was in the
hospital, I was laying there,
and they warned me.
They said, look,
you're very sick.
We don't know if the
medicine is going to work.
If you start seeing things
from people who have passed on
or hearing voices, tell
us because we're not
saying it's real.
We're saying that--
it's a ghost,
but we're saying we noticed
that when people are very sick
and this happens, that
means you're close
and we want to see
if we can fix it.
>>NOORY: Do they think you're
hallucinating or something?
>>MURCH: Could be hallucinating.
Could be medicine.
Could be your--
the veil is so thin
because you're so close
to death yourself.
So they explain it to
me, and immediately I
think I go to sleep.
And in comes my grandmother
who passed away four years
before, the grandmother who
snuck me into "Witchboard,"
and I was very close--
>>NOORY: She loves you much.
>>MURCH: She-- I
loved her very much.
She was very missed to this day.
But she came home with her
walker, and we caught up.
And I knew she was
dead in my-- in this.
It wasn't like,
oh, she's not dead.
I don't know this.
I knew something was wrong.
And I said to her they
told me that if I started
seeing things, and
she said, well, you
need to tell them
because you're sick
and they're not giving
you the right medicine.
And you need to wake up.
And she grabbed my arm,
and it made me wake up.
And I told the doctors.
And sure enough, they
tested, and it turned out
I had a different
form of the staph.
And it wasn't helping me.
And had they not done
that, I would have died.
>>NOORY: You would have died.
>>MURCH: Fast forward to 2020.
I've had back surgeries
that unfortunately got me--
I was almost here
once before and then
had to reschedule because
of my back surgery.
>>NOORY: I remember that.
That's right.
>>MURCH: But-- so thank you for
having me back, first of all.
And what happened was is I
had this big back surgery,
and it was from
T10 to my pelvis.
So it's basically--
>>NOORY: Ouch, it's
like that right?
>>MURCH: It's very big
and a nasty looking scar.
There were complications,
again, surgery.
I got home.
It was on my birthday,
February 20th.
I did not want a birthday party.
I just want to be left alone.
I was feeling sicker
every day I was home.
>>NOORY: No mood to celebrate.
>>MURCH: Yeah.
I was just ugh.
And I went to sleep.
And it was around 7:00, and
I woke up say around 10:00.
But what I woke up
to was my grandmother
had come in the room, and
I knew immediately uh oh.
>>NOORY: Here we go again.
>>MURCH: Here we go.
And this time she
wasn't as nice.
She was urgent and very
like you need to wake up.
I wanted to talk to her
and just ask her questions
I hadn't asked before.
And I was tired and--
when you're sick and it
goes into sepsis, which
is what was happening to me, I
was getting sicker and sicker,
and I just told her
I just want to sleep.
I just want to be left alone.
And she grabbed my arm
again and said wake up.
And when I woke up, I told
my husband something's wrong.
I don't feel good.
And he took my
temperature, and it
was 105.9, which I didn't know
thermometers went to 105.9.
I assumed I broke it.
And it was real.
And so I had gone into sepsis.
And if it wasn't for my
grandmother-- so twice--
I'm seen as a big skeptic,
and yet twice I've
had these very
personal experiences,
which if it wasn't for her,
I wouldn't be sitting here
with you.
>>NOORY: You'd be gone.
>>MURCH: So whether that's
my own mind creating
that to save me or whether
she actually intervened,
either way I love.
>>NOORY: What is
your website, Murch?
>>MURCH: So, yeah, people
can learn more about us
at the Talking Board
Historical Society at tbhs.org.
And if they want to learn
specifically about me,
it's Robert Murch--
M-U-R-C-H-- dotcom.
>>NOORY: Murch, thanks
for being on the program.
>>MURCH: Thank you so
much for having me.
It's been wonderful.
>>NOORY: So you may think will
George play with the Ouija
board after this interview.
No.
Thanks for watching
"Beyond Belief."
[THEME MUSIC]